---
layout: post
title: "Project #2: Hash Index"
comments: true
description: ""
keywords: ""
---

## Database Indexes

In a database, an index can be built on a subset of attributes of the table.
When queries require access to the tuples with an indexed attribute, the system needs to just look at the index to fetch the required data rather than do a sequential scan of the entire table. Of course, the data must be stored in the index in the first place, otherwise the system will resort to a sequential scan since it cannot find what it's looking for in the index.

The value that the index stores is some subset of the attributes of the table. In some queries, we might ask for attributes which are not present in the index in which case, the database simply resorts to either a sequential scan or an index lookup (to fetch the PK) followed by a sequential scan depending on which is faster. The latter might actually be slower when the disk reads are not sequential in nature.

So indexes can either be a hash index or a tree index. Hash index stores the indexed attributes as keys of the hashtable and the Tree index stores the indexed attributes as the keys of a B-Tree (usually a B+Tree).
The value that is stored depends on the use case.

Indexes are not always user generated. The database system itself generates an index to enforce data integrity constraints. For example, if there is a primary key, the system builds a tree index with the PK as the key of the B-Tree. This way, the system can enforce non duplication of the primary key by checking if a value already exists in the B-Tree.

Some systems go one step ahead and have the values of the B-Tree as the tuples themselves and get rid of the database file heap. The keys correspond to the system generated attribute which functions as a primary key. This is called a clustered index. Other systems just resort to organizing the database heap file.

Another way of achieving the above is to have pointers to the tuples as values and preserve the database heap file. When the queries perform range scans however, this may lead to non-sequential reads of data from the heap file leading to performance degradation.

One thing to note is that any index cannot be brought completely into the memory. So, its usually built assuming that the primary storage location is the disk and specific pages of the datastructure are brought into the memory as needed.

### Things to Note

- An index needs to be in sync with the physical contents of the database file. Which means any CRUD operation in the table must also result in an update to the index structure.
- There's a tradeoff b/w the number of indexes and the (storage overhead, update overhead).
- Index is a good way to increase query performance provided the indexes are built according to the query workload of the system.
- It is the job of the DBMS to figure out the index to use based on the query. Although, it is possible to FORCE an index in some systems.

### Hash Index

A hash index is basically an on disk hash table. The keys are hashed using a certain hash function and are stored in the corresponding slot in the memory.

We require the hash function to be fast and be collision resistant.

#### Hashing Scheme
Once you have a collision in a slot, what you do next is dependent on the hashing scheme. Some of the static hashing schemes are as follows:

1. Linear Probing:
- Keep moving down until you find an empty slot and put the (key, value) pair in there.
- In case there's a deleted slot, mark it as tombstone and when a tombstone is encountered, skip it.

2. Cuckoo Hashing:
- Keep 2 hashtables with different hash functions.
- Put the (key, value) pair into either of the hashtables wherever slot is free.
- If slot is not free, evict one of them and rehash the key and insert into new slot.
- This may result in a cyclic process which must be detected.

3. Robinhood Hashing:
- Store the offset along with the (key, value) pair with respect to the actual slot.
- Inserts are similar to linear probing but in case the offset becomes too large, we evict a slot and insert the current pair.

### B-Tree Index

Using a hash index, we can't answer range queries since the hash of the key contains no information about the key. B-Trees can handle such queries.
Also, when we have a hash index, we need to know the exact key. But in case of B-Tree indexes, we don't need to know the exact key and can find the closest match.